Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Anthony Volk. He is professor in
the Department of Child and Youth Studies and associate
member in the Department of Psychology at Brock University
is interests include bullying, parenting, personality, psychopathy, and evolution
of childhood. And today we're focusing mostly on bullying
from an evolutionary and developmental perspective. So Dr Volk,
welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure to
everyone.
Hi. Thank you for having me.
Ok. So let's start perhaps with the basic question
here. So uh from the perspective of psychology, scientific
psychology here, let's say, what is bullying? How do
you operationalize it exactly?
That's a good question. And uh it, it it's
fair to say that it's still a topic of
debate in the field. Uh How do we actually
define bullying? The major criteria that we use for
defining bullying is that bullying is a goal directed
behavior. So it has a degree of intentionality, but
we don't try to assess intentionality because that's a
very difficult behavior if you did this, not by
accident, whether it was for fun for uh power
for pleasure. That's a key element. Secondly, it has
to be harmful, so it can't be trivial. So
uh the behavior has to actually cause some kind
of lasting impact for individuals. And we know that
in many cases, bullying has very serious impacts. And
then lastly, um it has to have a power
imbalance and the power imbalance is something that is
difficult to capture and measure. But essentially, it means
that the individual who's being targeted has a difficult
time fighting back. So bullying is goal directed, harmful
behavior that uh is captured in a particular power
and balance at the moment that is uh behaved.
Mhm And how do you approach it from a
developmental and evolutionary perspectives?
So that's a great question. Um One of the
things that really got me started along this route
was when I was looking at World Health Organization
data, um they measure bullying across countries and I
was part of the study in 2005 that was
looking at Canadian data and we found that uh
individuals who bullied had better mental health than people
who weren't involved in bullying, which at the time
I wondered if I was making a mistake with
the data. Um I was just a graduate student
but it was true um that these individuals actually
had better mental health, which went against the common
idea at the time that bullies were socially maladjusted
individuals who didn't know how to behave. And in
fact spoke to the fact that these are people
who had skills for doing what they were doing.
So maybe there is a reason behind this. And
then when you follow that up with the logic
that you find bullying in virtually every society that's
been measured historical or present. Uh It suggests that
either this is development that's gone wrong on a
consistent and global level, or there might actually be
some reason why people are engaging in this behavior.
So, from an evolutionary perspective, do you think that
there's good enough evidence to make the case that
it's perhaps a, a form of adaptive behavior?
Again, another really good question uh was if this
is not maladaptive behavior, what's in it for the
people who are doing it? And I want to
be clear about a few different categories. Uh PEOPLE
who are victimized, uh If you want to talk
about them can suffer some really serious consequences. Uh
You know, one of the analogies I like to
use is that breaking a bone is something that
is gonna cause permanent stress. If you exercise, um
you will increase the density of your bone, but
if you break it, you cause permanent damage. And
that's what we see with bullying. The idea that
conflict is bad isn't necessarily true, but high levels
of conflict for individuals are really bad. So that's
not adaptive. Individuals who are bullies and victims at
the same time are also not very adaptive um
because they suffer from the same consequences as victimization
and they're the ones who fit the stereotype that
we think of people without self control, good social
skills, et cetera. But actual pure bullies who are
the majority of bullies and who conduct the majority
of bullying. So people who are bullies and not
bullied in return, they seem to have a lot
of benefits. Um AND we, we can talk about
specifically what those are. But the reality is that
these individuals, as I said, don't have mental health
issues, they don't have self esteem issues, they don't
have social uh cognitive issues. So they're, they have
good social skills and they seem to get some
really important benefits that are leading us to suggest
that this might be an adaptive behavior.
So before we get into some of the advantages,
particularly from an evolutionary perspective, what characterizes adolescent bullying,
specifically
bullying is something that is, again, it's a form
of behavior that carries an advantage in a power
imbalance. And so there's many, many different ways of
looking at bullying. Um One example that's gotten a
lot of attention recently is cyber bullying where there's
bullying that happens online, but bullying can be physical,
it can be verbal, it can be indirect where
you are excluding people or isolating people uh to
cause them harm. So there are many different ways
that bullying presents itself um in adolescence is particularly
important because this is when we see the largest
spike in bullying behavior. So longitudinal studies of aggression
in general show that we are most aggressive when
we're three or four years old, we haven't learned
how to uh behave with other people. But bullying
actually peaks not when we're three or four years
old, it peaks when we're about 14 or 15.
Um And that's something that makes adolescent bullying particularly
important for studying because not only is this a
peak time for bullying to behave, but we know
adolescents in general is when a lot of behaviors
become uh cemented or locked in or less plastic
as we move to adulthood. So understanding why some
people behave in this behavior uh allows us in
adolescence to predict adult behavior uh much more efficiently
than childhood behavior.
But are there particular aspects of adolescent bullying that
distinguish it from bullying in other stages of life?
Like for example, in childhood and adulthood and o
other stages,
one of the really important things that we've talked
about in um adolescent bullying is the goals that
are underlying bullying. And so certainly one of the
major reasons why we think bullying happens. There was
a lively debate and a good debate of whether
bullying peaked because you had the uh social order
disrupted when you went from middle school to high
school or whatever the equivalent is in many Western
countries. But that doesn't seem to explain it. What
seems to explain it is the age related changes
So it's not school related, it's age related. And
we think that that's because one of the big
things that comes online in adolescence that doesn't exist
in childhood is uh the intersexual behavior of adolescents.
So, you know, in English we say, you know,
there's cooties and that the other sex when you're
young are not people you want to interact with,
they're not people you want to spend time with.
But then by the time you're an adolescent, it
starts becoming important on average recognizing people with different
uh sexual Proclivities. But on average, it becomes important
to start interacting with people from the opposite sex.
And that's a major drive of bullying that we
believe differing from adulthood as you get older, uh
physical bullying becomes less common for two reasons. Uh
One physical bullying between older adolescents is more severe
than between younger Children. So if a couple of
eight year olds are punching each other, you might
get a couple of bruises. Couple of 18 year
old men are hitting each other, you break jaws,
right? So the consequences are more severe and because
of that, it's harder to hide. So we see
in adolescence a decrease in physical bullying um on
average, but overall we see an increase in bullying
um because we think that these stakes have gotten
higher as the dating game um kicks into gear
and individuals are competing more strongly than they did
as Children
is bullying related to personality in any way? I
mean, are there specific personality traits that predispose people
to becoming bullies?
Yeah, we like to look at development. Uh YOU
know, the analogy that I use is what's more
important for making a chocolate chip cookie. Is it
having chocolate or is it having an oven? You,
you need both? So it's always the combination of
the environment um and individual predispositions and when it
comes to eat individual predispositions, personality is one of
those factors that we know that has a genetic
uh influence on its expression. And in particular, we
use the Hexaco model um of bullying or sorry
of personality. And the Hexaco model is different from
other dimensions. And in that it has honesty, humility,
the age at the start of the Hexaco and
honesty, humility predicts your willingness to exploit others versus
your willingness to pass on exploiting others. So if
you see a wallet with uh €100 lying on
the street, do you take those €100 or do
you try and return them to somebody else? And
there's advantages from an evolutionary perspective to both behaviors.
If you give them back, you're being co-operative. If
you keep that €100 then you are being um
selfishly helping yourself. And that's the personality trait that
we find that best predicts bullying, perpetration, it's not
emotional empathy. So feeling what other people feel is
not a great predictor of bullying, it's not being
angry, that's not a great predictor of bullying. Um
TO a lesser extent, being impulsive is part of
uh predicting what bullying is. So that's conscientiousness. But
across cultures primarily, it's having low honesty humility, which
is the belief that you deserve better than others.
And that means that when it comes to bullying
other people, they're getting what they deserve because they're
not as good as you. They're not as smart,
they're not as strong, they're not as clever, they're
not as popular. And so these people deserve uh
the treatment that you give them and you deserve
to benefit by their expense. And that's really the
trait that most strongly predicts uh bullying behavior.
And so what sorts of evolutionary advantages would bullying
behavior have?
So we're looking to try and describe the specific
kinds of advantages that they have. We know from
a wide array of longitudinal. Uh SO over time
and international cross cultural data that a major advantage
that bullying provides is it leads to popularity. Um
So individuals who bully are more likely to become
popular over time and popularity is important to differentiate
from likability. So it doesn't necessarily mean that people
like you. Um BUT it means that they recognize
that you have social power and that you are
capable of influencing the peer group. So that's a
very common behavior that we've or outcome I should
say that we've seen uh across time and across
cultures around the world. Bullying can also get you
material resources. So you can edge out competitors from
the best spot in the playground, the best seat
at the lunch cafeteria, um scholarship opportunities. Uh YOU
know, in academia, you can try and edge people
out of grants. Um So bullying can provide material
resources as well as social resources. And then lastly,
and most importantly, from an evolutionary perspective, uh it
can provide reproductive advantages. So we know that bullying
is associated with increased frequency of dating and having
sex as adolescence. Um And I can say that
we literally yesterday just submitted a paper showing that
adolescents who bully 10 years on have more Children.
Um So we longitudinally have shown that it is
associated with having uh more of your genes being
passed on to the next generation. So there's some
really potent advantages for being involved with bullying.
So in the particular case of dating and mating
opportunities, what would be the rationale here? I mean,
for, for example, potential mating partners, why would females,
for example, feel attracted to bullies?
That's a really good question that we are wondering
ourselves and some of our data has helped answer
that. Um So why would you want to be
involved with somebody who's antisocial and takes advantage of
their power? You would think that would be bad
for the individual and it might be um we
see mixed evidence about the quality of relationships that
they have as adults. But one of the things
that we found that was surprising is they actually
invest more in their offspring. Um So let me
ask about how much effort do you put into
mating? How much effort you put into parenting and
how much effort you put into yourself or somatic
effort? Police report putting more effort into parenting. And
these are uh at least in Canada, we talk
about soccer moms or football moms and hockey dads.
Um These you can imagine are the people who
are yelling from the sideline, bullying the coach to
play their kid. Um TELLING the teacher that their
child needs more time and attention and this is
advantageous for passing on your genes. You have somebody
who is going to selfishly fight for their Children
who are also related to you. So you have
somebody who is securing resources at the same time
as they are passing them on to your Children
and, and somebody who uh I like to use
as a case model for bullying Donald Trump. Uh
He's married three supermodels. Uh So he's had success
in attracting uh at least by some measures, high
quality mates and he has the potential to invest
millions of dollars in each of them. And that's,
that's a potent advantage. If you're willing and able
to secure resources for your offspring, then that's something
that's potentially advantageous for somebody to partner with.
And does bullying have anything to do with power
and balances of power?
Power is what differentiates bullying from regular aggression. Um
So one of the really interesting things that we
thought about once we started looking at bullying as
an evolutionary advantage is why does it happen? Dominance,
hierarchies are supposed to reduce the competition. So that
number one and number 17 don't fight number 17
isn't a threat to number one and number 17
isn't gonna be able to beat number one. So
why would you have this power and balance? We
think it's because bullying is about a signal to
the group or the individuals who are involved in
it. And so number one isn't picking on number
17 because they need the resources of number 17.
Number one is picking on number 17 to show
number two and number three, what they are capable
of, they are capable of aggression. They are capable
of beating somebody who's a near level peer. So
the power imbalance doesn't work if you have an
18 year old who's beating up an eight year
old that's not going to impress anybody, but an
18 year old who can beat up another 18
year old or a 17 year old is sending
a signal of this is what happens if you
interact with me, I'm willing to be aggressive and
I'm capable of doing damage. And studies from the
Netherlands have shown that uh first that power and
popularity are predictors of future bullying. So the phrase
that power corrupts appears to be true. Um And
secondly, that bullies rotate through victims and those who
rotate through victims gain more popularity because they're sending
more signals. So in biology, there's a, a term
about honest signaling. The idea that if you send
a signal, it has to be something that can
easily be faked. So it's costly to send this
signal. And so it is costly for an 18
year old to fight with another 18 year old
that their 18 year old could fight back physically,
uh emotionally, intellectually. But by virtue of having a
power and balance to start with, it makes it
less costly for the bully to send that signal.
Like the right the most powerful signal a bully
could send would be for an 18 year old
to beat up the best mixed martial artist fighter
or the strongest debater on the planet. But that's
a really costly signal. So they don't try to
aim that high. Instead they find the right balance
between an individual who has some cost to defeat
but is not so costly that they can fight
back. And research again has shown the bullies are
really good at picking individuals who can't hurt their
popularity for whatever reason, because of their physical stature,
their mental stature, their social stature, but they are
still at a level that sends a signal that
the bully is not somebody to, to interact with.
So another important question here, I guess is are
there sex differences in bullying behavior that is, do
female bullies differ from male bullies. And I guess
in this case, both in terms of their, of
the frequency of their bullying, but also in terms
of their bullying behaviors specifically.
So, uh the first thing I'll say is one
of the things that surprised us, particularly when we
talk about bullying um outcomes and the advantages of
being a bully is that there aren't major sex
differences between individuals. Um So it's not simply that
women prefer strong men. And that's the end of
the story. Um THAT female bullies enjoy the same
reproductive advantages, same social advantages and the same material
advantages that male bullies do. But there are differences
in how uh individuals bully and this is true
for uh almost all kinds of aggression is that
male bullies are much more likely to engage in
physical bullying, physical bullying is risky. Uh You know,
as I mentioned earlier, 18 year olds who are
fighting can break jaws, um break bones grown men.
You know, it's a very serious and risky endeavor.
An evolutionary theory has repeatedly suggested and I think
provided evidence for the fact that because women are
typically the primary caregivers, they are less likely to
engage in those really seriously risky kinds of behavior.
Beyond that, you find that boys and girls engage
in almost equal levels of bullying. So if you
take out physical bullying, uh you find that girls
engage in about 1 to 2% more uh relational
bullying. So indirect attacking reputations than boys do. But
it's a very small difference whereas physical aggression is
about boys engaged, but 100% more uh bullying. So
the forms that they use are are different, but
the goals and the outcomes seem to be very
similar
and and the levels then do not vary much
between males and females.
Once you control for physical bullying, the levels are
virtually identical. Um So uh you find bullying is
more common amongst boys because this added layer of
physical bullying that boys do. Um But once you
take that out of the equation, which isn't trivial.
So I don't want to say that boys and
girls are equal because boys do engage in more
bullying than girls do. But once you remove the
physical bullying, then the two sexes are more or
less equal.
And what about the victims themselves? I mean, what
kinds of people do? Bullies tend to target? And
are there also sex differences when it comes to
the targets? Each sex tends to choose as victims?
Yeah. Uh The short answer is bullies choose targets
who are easy to attack and that can depend
on the bully characteristics and the individual's characteristics. An
example that I like to use is Lou Ferigno
who's an American bodybuilder at the same time as
Arnold Schwarzenegger. Um HE was the incredible Hulk when
they just painted him green, so massive individual and
he was bullied relentlessly, a huge man. Uh BECAUSE
he had a hearing disability. So people would make
fun of the way he talked and his inability
to quickly follow conversations. And that's not something you
can punch your way out of. That's not something
that you can physically uh overcome. And it was
a weakness that bullies were able to exploit. And
so bullies are really effective at finding the right
weakness in victims. And you might ask, why do
victims exist, why do they, why do they happen?
The reality is that we're a social species. And
one of the saddest incidents of bullying that I've
seen uh Wendy Craig and Deb Pepper did a
study where it was a, you know, BBC documentary
like David Attenborough where they put microphones on kids
and followed them around the playground. And you see
a young girl who gets grabbed by a group
of older girls and they start beating her up
and kicking her on the ground, an adult walks
by. So they stop and she, the girl has
a chance to get up and walk away. Two
minutes later, she walks back to the group and
they grab her and start kicking her and throwing
her to the ground again. And you say, why
would this person ever want to be bullied and
kicked? Why don't they just stay away? And the
reality is that for humans being left alone is
a death sentence uh in ancestral times. So these
individuals are faced with the choice of either get
this really negative attention or be left alone. And
sadly, a lot of these kids, I, I don't
want to use the word choose in that this
is what they want to do, but they're left
with a dilemma of either I am completely alone
or I get negative attention. And that's unfortunately, what
leads to a lot of victims being targeted. We
know that people who are victimized uh have on
average lower self esteem, uh and more emotional and
anxiety problems. And we know that bullying causes more
emotional anxiety problems. Some of the most damning evidence
against victims and victimization. Why it matters is that
it affects the expression of your immune system for
30 years after being bullied. So there are large
epigenetic which means the expression of your genes are
being changed. Uh It effects it last for decades.
And the kids who are being victimized are really
put in a difficult spot and, and just go
a little further. One of the common, the most
common recommendation for stopping bullying is getting the victims
to fight back and that of course, makes them
more costly to target. And that is the single
most effective way to stop bullying. The problem is
that's also the single most effective way to make
bullying worse. Because if you put the bully in
a spot where they are losing face, they're losing
status, they're losing their chance to get dates, then
they fight back even harder. And so asking individuals
to fight back and defend themselves is asking individuals
who are already chosen because they're in a disadvantage.
They have either a limited physical strength or social
strength or intellectual strength to fight back. It's putting
the position where that can backfire on them. And
the reality is that these individuals are not in
a spot where there is a fair fight to
gain back. And again, I use the example when
a lot of people say, well, I was somebody
picked on me and I fought back. It is
good for Children to experience stress that makes them
more resilient and stronger. Same thing happens with your
bones that if you exercise your bones become stronger
over time. But if you go past a certain
limit, both with your bones and with your emotional
capacity, you have a break and that break is
never as strong as it was before. So Children
who are victimized uh are like Children who have
a broken arm or a broken leg, that arm
or leg will never be as strong as it
was before. And that's why we see these decades
long experiences for most people, a small amount of
conflict or a small amount of aggression towards you
will help you be more resilient. But for Children
who are victimized, this intense behavior that we've unfortunately
seen can cause Children to, to kill themselves because
they, they feel so pressured is causing really severe
damage. So it's really important for me to emphasize
that while bullying may have adaptive advantages for bullies,
it is extremely costly for victims and the victims
or individuals who have been chosen because they can't
fight back effectively. And again, research shows us that
bullies are very strategic in who they target. If
you have a small uh physically weak bully, they
will attack somebody who's socially isolated. If you have
a physically strong bully, they'll attack somebody who's physically
isolated or, or, or weaker. So it is really
important for us to differentiate between the idea that
bullying can be adapted for those who use it
while still really costly for the victims and for
society in general. Um AS a behavior.
Mhm. So, I mean, there are probably particular cases,
particular extreme cases where the psychological damage to the
victims would be like permanent, I mean, would would
last for the rest of their lives.
Uh uh Yes. Uh AND the data shows that
that there are that mental health effects from bullying
last for decades. We don't have an entire life
data yet, but we know that 30 years after
being bullied as an adolescent, there are still greater
risks of mental health issues. Uh And that's by
design, remember that what the bullying is trying to
do is send a signal about how dangerous they
are to cross paths with. And so the victim
gets that signal, the victim realizes that if you
meet this person, it it it can end really
badly. And there's a debate in the bullying literature,
if repetition needs to happen, how often does bullying
need to happen for it to happen? I'm of
this school of thought that it, it only needs
to happen once. Um AND uh a colleague at
a recent conference gave an example of a boy
who went to school with a bully. Uh AND
the first time the bully targeted them, the bully
threw them to the ground and then started stomping
on them and broke their ribs and broke their
shoulders. That was the only incident between them. It
didn't happen again. But you can imagine that's the
only incident you need if you want to send
a message and for the victim, that's the only
incident you need for the rest of your life
to be terrified of a physical confrontation. You had
your, your body broken. If it had been more
severe, it could have punctured your lung and died.
These are really s potentially severe behaviors that uh
again, the bullying is the bully is using as
a signal to the rest of the peer group.
Look what I can do, but the victim is
very clearly see that, look what can happen to
me. And these events can last traumatically for the
entire life.
And the in the that particular case you described
there, I mean, it could have been life threatening
even directly. But there are other extreme cases where
it's life threatening uh, in a different way that
is, it can leave the person, the child, the
adolescent to commit suicide even. Right.
Yeah. Yeah. I, I'm unfortunately aware of other cases
where the bullying has led to the death of
an individual, uh, directly because of what they've done.
But you're right that also indirectly. Um, AND cyberbullying
is a case where this has gotten a lot
of attention. You put something online, um, that puts
a child in a position where they feel that
the entire world not necessarily incorrectly, the entire world
can see their weaknesses and their failures. And that
kind of pressure is so intense that unfortunately, it
has resulted in many cases of, of Children killing
themselves. And so this is not of behavior we
can talk about more uh that is genetically determined
and can't be changed. That's a a common theme
in evolutionary theory, but it's also really too important
to recognize it when we say that this is
evolutionarily adaptive or it's natural for kids to engage
in bullying. That doesn't mean it's good. You know,
nature is happy to make a fuzzy cute bunny
and it's happy to make a virus that eats
that fuzzy bunny's brain alive. There, there's no good
or bad coming from nature. So I really wanna
emphasize that it, it's not saying that this is
a naturalistic behavior that is good for us to
endorse simply because it may have evolutionary advantages. The
cost of victims are extreme.
So I would like to ask you a little
bit more about the psychological traits of bullies. Earlier
I asked you about personality traits. Does bullying relate
in any way to psychopathic traits, particularly in men?
Bullying
is correlated with low honesty, humility, which is correlated
with the dark triad of behaviors which is narcissism,
machiavellian. So, scheming and planning um and psychopathy and
so it is absolutely related to all three. We
find higher levels of psychopathy in men than in
women. So that relationship is more common in men
than women. I think when we go back to
honesty, humility, it really relates to a, a willingness
to exploit others for your own benefit. So if
you think of a dark and selfish gene, uh
and the prisoner's dilemma theory, which is often used
to explain cooper operation. These are people who are
willing to exploit others to get what they want.
And a common theme that we hear from bullies
is that the individual deserved it, right? They had
it coming. Um Because they're stupid, they're ugly, they're,
they're dumb, they, they're not good at interacting with
others. And if you have this kind of arrogance,
which is part of what underlies psychopathy uh saying
that, you know, I'm better than other people. It
goes along with the idea that then people get
what they deserve. And so it makes it easier
to victimize individuals because you view them as deserving
victimization. And so we absolutely see a strong link
between antisocial personality and bullying behavior.
And is there a link between bullying behavior and
other sorts of psychopathology?
That was one of the things that we, as
I mentioned at the start, we really early on
interest and we thought we'd see the idea that
these bullies are, you know, low in self esteem,
they have bad social skills, poor theory of mind,
which means understanding how other people think and they
don't. Um THAT'S true of bully victims. And why
we think that that stereotype is persisted is because
bully victims are the kids who are both bullies
and victims and they come from bad households, they
have poor social skills and they're likely the ones
who are being caught, the head of the football
team, uh the cheerleader, uh who's queen of the
cheerleaders, uh the, the, the straight A student, these
are people who know how to avoid being caught.
And so they don't get viewed by adults as
being bullies more often, but they're engaging in this
behavior much more than the bully victims. And the
damage that they do is much more severe because
they have these good social skills. So the really
negative outcomes being associated with bullying are number one,
you're more likely to be involved with antisocial behavior
later on. I think that's partly because they have
these antisocial traits to begin with, say low honesty,
humility or psychopathy as you mentioned. And then people
are less likely to like you. So there's a
big difference between uh likability and popularity and you
can see this distinction in all kinds of literature.
It's an evolutionary psychology, it's dominance and prestige in
politics. They talk about hard versus soft power. The
idea is that you can influence people by coercing
them or by having them want to be with
you. So, being motivated to cooper with you and
consistently bullies are rated as being less light. And
I'll go back to my example of Donald Trump.
Uh Even many of his supporters will say they
don't like the way he behaves, they don't like
what he does and the way he treats people,
but they respect that he's effective, they respect that
he can get the job done. And if he's
on their side, he's getting them resources that they
need. And so that's the, the trade off that
bullies are having that people respect that they're dominant
and powerful and can get their way, but they
don't particularly like or trust them because they have
shown that when push comes to shove, to shove,
they're willing to hurt other people to get what
they want. And people are rightly um concerned with
the fact that if you're willing to do this
to XYZ, they're willing to do it to you
if you get in their way. So when we
talk about the, the cost of bullying, that's one
of the major costs is that while people respect
the power the bullies have and acknowledge the power
the bullies have. They don't like them. And that's
potentially a really serious issue. If the bully ever
loses their power, then they don't have allies who
want to stay with them or help support them.
So, I it's a precarious position for Belize to
be in
a and so particularly when it comes to, of
course, childhood and adolescent bullying, lots of it happen
uh at school. So are there any social factors
related to the way schools are structured that might
contribute to bullying behavior?
Absolutely. You know, the same thing when I mentioned
the the chocolate chip cookie, you need to have
the oven for it to develop a polar bear's
fur makes no sense in the Sahara Desert. So
you have to understand the environment if you want
to understand evolutionary adaptations and we know that more
competitive environments uh are more likely to cause bullying.
We know that um an absence of supervision is
more likely to cause bullying, but only for individuals
who have low uh honesty, humility or antisocial personality
traits. So for individuals who are not predisposed to
take advantage of others, it doesn't matter if adults
are paying attention, but for individuals who are predisposed
to maybe take advantage of others for their own
benefit, then it really matters if adults are focusing
in on uh that behavior or not. And interestingly
data has recently corroborated that for the outcomes of
victims. It's actually worse when there are fewer victims
in a classroom. So if you're victimized and there's
10 other people in the class who are victimized.
Out of 30 your mental health outcomes are better
than if you're the only one in the entire
class. And that deals with this idea of being
isolated uh and being selected as somebody who's not
part of the group. So both for bullies and
for victims, the social environment has a major impact
and we see this across cultures that every culture
we've looked at shows bullying, but its prevalence rates
are so that slightly different, the ratio of bullies
to victims are slightly different and the most common
or frequencies of different kinds of bullying. So physical
versus relational are different across cultures. And that's really
important to understand because it suggests that bullying is
a faculty of adaptation. What we mean by that
is its likelihood of happening. It's likelihood of being
expressed depends on the environmental conditions. So a a
great quote that I have from uh some adolescents
is they, we were asking them why they would
be involved with defending somebody else. And one of
them said I didn't get involved because that person
was really big. But if my friends were around
with me, then I would have stepped in. And
so they recognize the power disadvantage that they're not
capable of stopping this powerful bully at the time.
But if the environmental circumstances were different and they
had four or five friends behind them, then they
might have stepped in and stopped it. So, bullying
really depends a lot on the environmental contingency uh
that operates around it. I don't know if I,
if I can go a little further, somebody who
I've labeled somebody else who I've labeled as a
bully, uh as an adult is Vladimir Putin, uh
who tried attacking Ukraine a weaker country and you
can clearly see that Ukraine needs help from other
bystanders from Europe and North America to support it.
And if they don't have that, that's going to
encourage the bully to keep going on. And as
of this recording, uh there's debate in the US
Senate about providing aid to Ukraine and Putin just
released a statement saying that he's not backing down
until he gets what he wants, which is directly
related to the fact that he's seeing a lack
of support in the environment or potentially a lack
of support in the environment. And so the environmental
conditions are really important for adjusting the costs and
benefits of bullying and therefore the likelihood that somebody
will engage in bullying.
So one of the things that you mentioned there
that I want to ask you more about is
uh at the beginning, you mentioned that a competitive
environments promote bullying behavior. So in the case of
schools, is that related in any way, also to
the fact that there's academic performance there to be
measured academic achievements and all of that or not,
any time you have a non zero sum competition,
you're likely to see less bullying by non zero
sum means everybody can benefit when only one person
can benefit, then you're likely to see an increase
in bullying. And the reason is it becomes more
adaptive to bully. So if there's um an academic
prize for Greatest Interview, um and you, you and
I are competing for that, then there's more motive
for us to try and win that prize. If
there's only one, whereas that prize is given to
anybody who does a good interview, then we can
focus on our own achievements without trying to attack
the other individual. So absolutely, when we find higher
levels of income inequality, we've looked at this uh
at global levels, higher levels of income inequality are
associated with higher levels of bullying. And the idea
there is it's more adaptive to compete when there
are big and rare prizes for winning. The, the
more that we make prizes egalitarian, the less incentive
there is to compete for those prizes and competing
again um is often done by individuals who have
this predisposition to want to try and uh be
number one and win those competitions.
And when and why do people intervene in bullying
incidents? There is they see someone being a victim
of a particular bullying incident when and why do
they decide to intervene?
So there's two primary reasons that tend to predict
uh what we call defenders, bullying. Uh IN bullying
instance, when somebody steps in to try and protect
the victim. Uh The first is a sense of
moral empathy. So not necessarily emotional empathy, I feel
what they feel, but a, a sense of justice
and what's right. And that's high honesty, humility. But
it's also interestingly associated with higher levels of power.
And that makes sense when you again consider that
bullying is based on a power of disadvantage. So
weaker individuals rarely intervene because their intervention is ineffective.
Um I if the most popular kids in the
class are picking on somebody and you're number 20
out of 30 you're not likely to change the
behavior of number 12 and three. BASED on your
popularity and your strength. On the other hand, if
number three is bullying and you're number one in
the class in terms of popularity and and social
status, then you can effectively apply your power to
end that. So interestingly, and it's something that we're
very interested in following. Um INDIVIDUALS can use their
social power in a prosocial way by intervening and
stopping the bully and individuals who do that gain
popularity, they also gain liability. So they get the
most of the best of both worlds and that
people say that yes, this person has effective power
like bullies do, but they like them because they
use it in a way that helps other people.
That is the best way that we have found
to being popular and light, you know, kind of
the two benefits of people recognize that you have
power, but they like being around you because you
don't abuse it. So that's a particularly interesting direction
that we wanna really explore and um look at
for interventions which I'm sure we'll chat about. Um
But I can maybe mention here is a good
point that interventions that rely on peers to step
in have been shown to be effective. Uh Kiva
is the, the model that's been done out of
Finland with Christina Salma Ali, it's been tested around
the world reduces bullying by about 20 25% which
is uh for better or for worse, but the
best that we have, but it doesn't work for
high popularity bullies who unfortunately most of the bullies
so peers can intervene and stop low and medium
status bullies from bullying. And so the popular kids
can say, hey, knock it off. But when it's
the popular kids who are doing the bullying, peers
don't have much of an impact because it they're
not at the top of the power scheme. So
it's really important to consider the implications of power
and the willingness of people to step in and
the effectiveness of people to step in. Uh You
know, as I said, I've written a couple of
articles uh in Canadian newspapers about Vladimir Putin being
a bully. I unfortunately do not have the power
to stop Vladimir Putin's behavior. I know as, as
a single academic, my power effect on him is
negligible. Right. And that's, that would be the same
thing in a classroom if the popular kids are
bullying and somebody wants to try and defend them
without power, your likelihood of being able to stop
it is very low. Doesn't mean that we shouldn't
try. Um, BUT it does mean that the effectiveness
is, is greatly diminished.
Mhm. Uh So I have here one more topic
that I would like to ask you about and
then a couple of questions from a patron of
the show, but just before we get into the
final topic, uh still about on the topic of
bullying. Uh AND when it comes to intervention specifically,
so because of the very nefarious individual and societal
effects that bullying has as we talked about here
today, uh I mean, from a and since you
come from an evolutionary and developmental perspective, do we
know of any good interventions to reduce bullying uh
effectively?
You know, that that's the really big question. Um
And we have learned a lot in 20 years
about what works and what doesn't work. Um So
some of the things that don't work are asking
the victims to fight back. Um BECAUSE as I
said earlier, that uh often backfires and makes the
problem worse. Having the bully and the victim sit
down together and try and mediate, it makes the
problem worse. The bully says you ratted on me
and we see the bullying goes down but then
it goes back worse than it was before and
zero tolerance policies where schools say if you do
this, we're gonna suspend you and that doesn't work
because bullies are smart and don't get caught. So
that's not very effective. What does work? I've mentioned
the Kiva program that is effective in stopping a
low and medium popularity bullies, uh not effective with
higher popularity bullies. A really interesting study was done
in Norway where uh Dan Elvas was kind of
the the the godfather of bullying research. And he
was able to implement a program where the federal
government, their version of provincial and municipal and schools
and parents all cracked down on bullying and they
reduced bullying by almost 40% which is the biggest
reduction we've seen. But of course, it was very
intensive to try and maintain this focus on bullying.
And what was really instructive was after three years
as governments do. They said, ok, well, that problem's
solved, let's stop investing in it. And bullying immediately
shot back up to pre intervention levels, which is
really important from an evolutionary perspective because it tells
us that bullying is not simply a learned or
copycat behavior. If it was students would have copied
that low level and kept it at low levels.
The fact that it popped back up tells us
that it's sensitive to costs and benefits when adults
really tried to make it uh costly, that bullies
avoided doing it. What we focused on in our
group is a program called meaningful roles where we
try and teach bullies to get the goals that
they want without hurting others. Right? So I'm not
often invited to schools anymore. I was invited frequently
early in my career. But when I go to
schools and say bullying will get you sex, popularity
and resources and we can't catch you. That's not
a good message for adolescence, right? Because of course,
those are things that adolescents want. Uh And many
people beyond adolescence want. So instead, we're taking the
message of, we recognize that sex and popularity and
resources are important to you. But there's better ways
of getting them, there's ways of getting them in
particular that will make you popular and light. So
if you wanna be popular in the classroom, uh
we can give you the role of whenever somebody
comes in the classroom, you say hello, David, welcome
to uh Mrs Smith's grade seven classroom. And so
every person who walks in that classroom recognizes that
person who used to be a bully and they're
getting the popularity that they wanted, they're getting the
attention that they want, but they're doing it in
a nice way. And so number one, it takes
away from their time and ability to bully others
because they're doing something else. And number two, it's
showing them that they can get what they want
without having to be antisocial towards other people. And
I think that's a really critical factor that we
have to acknowledge because otherwise it, it's a really
hard sell to say to adolescents. Stop doing this.
We can't catch you doing this and it's getting
you more sex and popularity. That's, that's, those are
very powerful incentives for individuals to behave in that
way. So we need to find better ways of
showing how people can get those goals without being
antisocial towards other people.
Mhm. So changing topics, then I would like to
ask you about something that is perhaps, I don't
know to what extent exactly, but perhaps somewhat related
to bullying. But what is classroom in civility and
how is it conceptualized by both students and teachers
classroom incivility was something that uh my former colleague
Zito Marini, who passed away a few years ago
was interested in and it's basically following the rules
that we have for governing civil behavior or appropriate
social behavior. So, uh standing in line quietly, not
talking when the teacher is talking, uh not packing
up your books early, not making rude jokes to
other people in the class. And these kinds of
behaviors were often viewed as fairly trivial. Um AND
not worth worrying about compared to some of the
more severe behaviors that we've seen in the classroom.
But what we've seen is that the same personality
traits that predict more antisocial behavior, predict uncivil behavior
and that these incivil behaviors over time predict your
behavior in more severe situations. So kids who are
likely to pack up their books early, who are
likely to talk when the teacher is talking are
also more likely over time to bully other kids
and, and cause uh more severe antisocial problems. So,
what we think is happening is that civility is
again a form of costly signaling. So why do
we say the word, please? You know, if you're
having some nice tapas tonight, uh and I want
some of that octopus. Why do I have to
say? Can you please pass me that? Not just
pass me that it's because adding the word please
is showing you that I'm willing to make effort
to be civil and cooper when you don't have
that. If I just said pass me the octopus,
then I am showing that I don't care about
investing in that relationship. I don't care about investing
in that cost and that seems to be a
low level but important route of antisocial behavior.
Mhm And so uh I have then two questions
from a patron of the show, as I mentioned
earlier, Bernardo Sei. And they are basically about some
of the work you've been doing on life history
theory and life history strategies and topics of the
sort. So, uh the first one has to do
directly with one of your papers titled Historical and
The Hunter Gatherer Perspectives on Fast, slow life history
strategies. And the question is uh could you discuss
if the predictions made by life history theory about
environmental effects are supported by the historical evidence we
have or not?
So it depends what aspect of life history theory.
Life history theory evolve in biology. No pun intended
um as a way of explaining how organisms allocate
their time and energy across their lifespan. So, did
they spend it more in chasing mates and raising
their offspring and growing a big body? Um And
so that it is a very viable and active
part in the biological literature, what came into the
human literature um were theories that said in harsh
environments, individuals should speed up their reproduction so that
they could reproduce before they died. The reality um
is that when we look at those effects, they're
small across cultures. Um And I'm involved in reviewing
a, a rebuttal to what I said, I'm trying
to pick my words carefully here. Uh But the
basic idea is that there's a very small effect
that being in antisocial or stressful environments is more
likely to cause early puberty and having more Children.
The first problem with that is it doesn't consider
the reverse effects in that we know that individuals
who have early puberty and have kids when they're
teenagers, in modern societies are much more likely to
then have bad environment. So, if you were a
15 year old girl in Spain and you're pregnant,
you're likely to drop out of high school, you're
less likely to go to university, you're less likely
to have a stable marriage, you're less likely to
have financial stability, you're more likely to be involved
with substance abuse. And these are big effects. So
we see right away that the opposite explanation has
a much stronger uh effect size to it, that
it's not that bad environments are causing people to
mature more quickly. But being an early mature and
in particular, having Children early is a significant risk
factor um for their development in modern societies. Historically,
when we look at the data, the data is
unequivocal that historically, in the past, individuals who had
more resources were able to have puberty sooner because
they had the physical resources, they were able to
have shorter inter birth intervals because they either could
restore their nutrition faster as women or have uh
wet nurses and or as men, they could have
more wives or uh concubines or, you know, out
of marriage partners that they could reproduce with. And
the genetic evidence shows this as well that repeatedly
in human history, a small group of men have
dominated the gene pool. So 1% of all people
alive today are descended from Genghis Khan, uh the
founders of the original first Chinese civilization. Um A
group of men from that time who we believe
are likely to be the rulers of that time
are related to 20% of Chinese men alive today.
Uh You find the same correlations in Ireland, in
the Middle East where small groups of individuals have
exploited their resources and didn't have a slow strategy.
And that's the thing. They didn't delay the reproduction.
They didn't have fewer Children that they invest in.
Instead they invested heavily in reproduction. So why do
we see what we see today? Uh I think
partly because of what I've said, um that's that
we're looking at it the wrong way. It's not
the environment causing the early reproduction. It's the early
reproduction leading to the environment. And secondly, we are
in a demographically, very unusual time for human beings.
And one of the major, if not the biggest
question, evolutionary psychology is, why don't we repro reproduce
more often? So as a uh faculty in uh
uh in Canada, my salary is public. So I
make about 100 and $75,000 a year as a
full professor. Now, why don't I have 15 kids?
I have three, which is more than a lot
of professors. Why not? 15? Why not 20? I
can theoretically support them. And we're in a very
strange place demographically. Um And this is where I
think some of the confusion comes from, is looking
at modern humans and how we behave versus what
was available in the past. So uh put differently
if somebody was in a harsh environment in the
past and they wanted to speed up the reproduction
where did they get the resources from? You can
have uh 10 kids in Spain or in Canada
where we have social networks where the government will
provide you free education to an extent for food
and housing and medical care that didn't exist 1000
years ago, 10,000 years ago, 100,000 years ago, if
you're a hunter gatherer and you have 10 Children
and you can't provide for them, they die. It's
a really maladapted outcome. So that's why I think
it's really important for life history theory. But for
behavior and evolutionary theory in general to look beyond
modern examples. So uh as much as we're pleased
that we found data showing that uh it's currently
adaptive to be a bully and that you have
more offspring. That's not the same thing as saying
that it was adaptive in the past. We do
have lots of other evidence that it was adaptive
in the past. But we have to be very
careful about using modern data to draw conclusions about
how we used to live ancestrally
and so related to that. The also the second
question, how do we know if life history strategies
are the product of nature or nurture? Most studies
on the subject are correlation
really good questions from your patron. Um One of
the things that you would expect if you saw
say, for example, uh the argument being that harsh
environments cause you to speed up puberty. And I've
argued the opposite. And Sarah Hury in her book,
um, was the first one to do that. I
think it was, uh, Mother Nature mentioned this possibility
that it was this reverse effect. And you would
expect that if you were, had a teenage mother,
uh, who gave birth to you, who didn't go
to high school, who didn't have a stable relationship
because not surprisingly, teenage relationships are not as strong
as getting married in your late twenties or thirties,
um who doesn't have a lot of income. So
it looks like this person's harsh environment is associated
with their uh earlier reproduction. But not only is
that being influenced by the environment that they're raised
in, they're watching their mother's behavior. So father absence
is commonly something that is associated with the faster
life history. But if they're observing their way that
their mother behaves, we know from a huge range
of uh studies that Children imitate their parents. Uh
It, it's an evolutionarily adaptive strategy. It underlies the
earliest evolutionary psychology which is Bowie's attachment that you
should copy what your parents did because they managed
to survive and reproduce and make you. So they're,
they're at least a good enough model to copy
from the environment. So if an individual is being
born uh in an environment to a teenage mother
who doesn't go to high school, who has unstable
relationships, it's not shocking that that person is then
more likely to grow up in uh an environment
and become less likely to go to high school
and graduate high school and have stable partners because
they're learning from the environment. So I would completely
agree with the idea that we need to be
very cautious about these correlational um behaviors and make
sure that we're looking at them from all the
different perspectives that could cause causation, which is a
bad way of saying when we have correlations, you
wanna make sure that it's not just going in
one direction that other directions have been looked at
and have been found less plausible. And in the
case of life history theory, the effect sizes are
much larger in the direction going from having a
mother. And we know that genetics are really strongly
involved with early reproduction and timing of anarchy that
having mother in that situation is a really big
effect size for you having risks later on in
your development, going the other direction. It's a really
small effect size that being in that environment predicting
you having early reproduction is a very small factor
and probably the result of that larger correlation. So
more research needs to be done in the directions
of these effects and then especially we need to
look and make sure that they make sense historically
because as I said earlier, uh you know, it
reminds me of a 19 eighties commercial for burgers
where they were saying, where is the beef? It
was, you know, looking at a mcdonald's hamburger and
saying it's so small. That's the reality. How does
this happen in the in ancestral environment? How do
you speed up your reproduction if you're in a
one acre farm, uh or one square kilometer farm
and you already have two or three people living
there? How do you get more food? There's, there's
not social systems like we have today that will
provide for your offspring. So we need to look
at the viability of these theories um in the
environments that they would have evolved in.
Great. So, Doctor Volt, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
you and your work on the internet?
Uh I maintain a relatively low profile. Um But
if you Google my name, uh you'll, you'll see
my labs. Uh There's Brock U dot C A
slash Vogue, V as in Victor Olk lab as
well as uh Brock U dot C A slash
brave, which is um a group of us who
are studying bullying from an evolutionary perspective and trying
to intervene. Um So I always welcome any thoughts
or questions or ideas that folks have. Um But
generally I try to stay off of arguments uh
on social media because it's not my forte for
engaging in those, but I welcome any thoughts, ideas
or questions that folks may have.
So thank you so much again for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you. Thank you for
having me. Hi guys. Thank you for watching this
interview. Until the end. If you liked it, please
share it. Leave a like and hit the subscription
button. The show is brought to you by N
Lights Learning and development. Then differently check the website
at N lights.com and also please consider supporting the
show on Patreon or paypal. I would also like
to give a huge thank you to my main
patrons and paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and
Frederick Suno Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle
Matthew Whitting B no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ
Conners, Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine
in NAI Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel Governor
Mikel Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken
Hall, her ma J and Lain Jung Y and
the Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel.
S friends, David Sloan Wilson Yasa, dear Roman Roach
Diego and Jan Punter Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba,
Adam Hunt, Pavla Stassi Na Me, Gary G Alman,
Sam of Zal Ari and Y Polton John Barboza,
Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broder Douglas Fry Franca
Gilon Cortez or Scott Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano, Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di A Costa, Anton
Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier,
Bangalore Fists, Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon Starry Michael
Bailey. Then spur by Robert Grassy Zorn, Jeff mcmahon,
Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke
Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica Week
in the B brand Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man,
George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate Von Goler, Alexander
Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer
Urla. Good enough, Gregory Hastings David Pins of Sean
Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net. A special thanks
to my producers is our web, Jim Frank Lucani,
Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller
Thomas Rumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, John Carl, Negro,
Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And to my executive
producers, Matthew lavender, Si Adrian Bogdan Knit and Rosie.
Thank you for all.